<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
<head>
<title>Act I</title>
<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
<h2>
<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
</h2>
<p>
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">In PROSOROV’S house. A sitting-room with pillars; behind is seen a
large dining-room. It is midday, the sun is shining brightly outside. In
the dining-room the table is being laid for lunch.</i>
</p>
<table>
<tbody>

<p>
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</b>, in the regulation blue dress of a teacher at a girl’s high
school, is walking about correcting exercise books; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b>, in a black
dress, with a hat on her knees, sits and reads a book; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</b>, in white,
stands about, with a thoughtful expression.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>It’s just a year since father died last May the fifth, on your
name-day, Irina. It was very cold then, and snowing. I thought I would
never survive it, and you were in a dead faint. And now a year has gone
by and we are already thinking about it without pain, and you are
wearing a white dress and your face is happy. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Clock strikes twelve.</i> And
the clock struck just the same way then. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pause.</i> I remember that there
was music at the funeral, and they fired a volley in the cemetery. He
was a general in command of a brigade but there were few people present.
Of course, it was raining then, raining hard, and snowing.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Why think about it!
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">BARON <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</b> appear by the table in the
dining-room, behind the pillars.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>It’s so warm to-day that we can keep the windows open, though the
birches are not yet in flower. Father was put in command of a brigade,
and he rode out of Moscow with us eleven years ago. I remember perfectly
that it was early in May and that everything in Moscow was flowering
then. It was warm too, everything was bathed in sunshine. Eleven years
have gone, and I remember everything as if we rode out only yesterday.
Oh, God! When I awoke this morning and saw all the light and the spring,
joy entered my heart, and I longed passionately to go home.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td>Will you take a bet on it?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>Oh, nonsense.
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b>, lost in a reverie over her book, whistles softly.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Don’t whistle, Masha. How can you! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pause.</i> I’m always having
headaches from having to go to the High School every day and then teach
till evening. Strange thoughts come to me, as if I were already an old
woman. And really, during these four years that I have been working
here, I have been feeling as if every day my strength and youth have
been squeezed out of me, drop by drop. And only one desire grows and
gains in strength...
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>To go away to Moscow. To sell the house, drop everything here,
and go to Moscow...
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Yes! To Moscow, and as soon as possible.
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</b> laugh.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>I expect Andrey will become a professor, but still, he won’t want
to live here. Only poor Masha must go on living here.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Masha can come to Moscow every year, for the whole summer.
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b> is whistling gently.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Everything will be arranged, please God. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looks out of the
window.</i> It’s nice out to-day. I don’t know why I’m so happy: I
remembered this morning that it was my name-day, and I suddenly felt
glad and remembered my childhood, when mother was still with us. What
beautiful thoughts I had, what thoughts!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>You’re all radiance to-day, I’ve never seen you look so lovely.
And Masha is pretty, too. Andrey wouldn’t be bad-looking, if he wasn’t
so stout; it does spoil his appearance. But I’ve grown old and very
thin, I suppose it’s because I get angry with the girls at school.
To-day I’m free. I’m at home. I haven’t got a headache, and I feel
younger than I was yesterday. I’m only twenty-eight.... All’s well, God
is everywhere, but it seems to me that if only I were married and could
stay at home all day, it would be even better. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pause.</i> I should love my
husband.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</b>.</i> I’m tired of listening to the rot you talk.
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Entering the sitting-room.</i> I forgot to say that Vershinin, our new
lieutenant-colonel of artillery, is coming to see us to-day. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sits down
to the piano.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>That’s good. I’m glad.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Is he old?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>Oh, no. Forty or forty-five, at the very outside. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Plays
softly.</i> He seems rather a good sort. He’s certainly no fool, only he
likes to hear himself speak.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Is he interesting?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>Oh, he’s all right, but there’s his wife, his mother-in-law,
and two daughters. This is his second wife. He pays calls and tells
everybody that he’s got a wife and two daughters. He’ll tell you so
here. The wife isn’t all there, she does her hair like a flapper and
gushes extremely. She talks philosophy and tries to commit suicide every
now and again, apparently in order to annoy her husband. I should have
left her long ago, but he bears up patiently, and just grumbles.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enters with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</b> from the dining-room.</i> With one hand I
can only lift fifty-four pounds, but with both hands I can lift 180, or
even 200 pounds. From this I conclude that two men are not twice as
strong as one, but three times, perhaps even more....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads a newspaper as he walks.</i> If your hair is coming
out... take an ounce of naphthaline and hail a bottle of spirit...
dissolve and use daily.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Makes a note in his pocket diary.</i> When found
make a note of! Not that I want it though.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Crosses it out.</i> It
doesn’t matter.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Ivan Romanovitch, dear Ivan Romanovitch!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td>What does my own little girl want?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Ivan Romanovitch, dear Ivan Romanovitch! I feel as if I were
sailing under the broad blue sky with great white birds around me. Why
is that? Why?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses her hands, tenderly.</i> My white bird....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>When I woke up to-day and got up and dressed myself, I suddenly
began to feel as if everything in this life was open to me, and that I
knew how I must live. Dear Ivan Romanovitch, I know everything. A man
must work, toil in the sweat of his brow, whoever he may be, for that is
the meaning and object of his life, his happiness, his enthusiasm. How
fine it is to be a workman who gets up at daybreak and breaks stones in
the street, or a shepherd, or a schoolmaster, who teaches children, or
an engine-driver on the railway.... My God, let alone a man, it’s better
to be an ox, or just a horse, so long as it can work, than a young woman
who wakes up at twelve o’clock, has her coffee in bed, and then spends
two hours dressing.... Oh it’s awful! Sometimes when it’s hot, your
thirst can be just as tiresome as my need for work. And if I don’t get
up early in future and work, Ivan Romanovitch, then you may refuse me
your friendship.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Tenderly.</i> I’ll refuse, I’ll refuse....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Father used to make us get up at seven. Now Irina wakes at seven
and lies and meditates about something till nine at least. And she looks
so serious! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>You’re so used to seeing me as a little girl that it seems queer
to you when my face is serious. I’m twenty!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>How well I can understand that craving for work, oh God! I’ve
never worked once in my life. I was born in Petersburg, a chilly, lazy
place, in a family which never knew what work or worry meant. I remember
that when I used to come home from my regiment, a footman used to have
to pull off my boots while I fidgeted and my mother looked on in
adoration and wondered why other people didn’t see me in the same light.
They shielded me from work; but only just in time! A new age is dawning,
the people are marching on us all, a powerful, health-giving storm is
gathering, it is drawing near, soon it will be upon us and it will drive
away laziness, indifference, the prejudice against labour, and rotten
dullness from our society. I shall work, and in twenty-five or thirty
years, every man will have to work. Every one!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td>I shan’t work.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>You don’t matter.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</td>
<td>In twenty-five years’ time, we shall all be dead, thank the
Lord. In two or three years’ time apoplexy will carry you off, or else
I’ll blow your brains out, my pet. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes a scent-bottle out of his
pocket and sprinkles his chest and hands.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i> It’s quite true, I never have worked. After I came
down from the university I never stirred a finger or opened a book, I
just read the papers.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes another newspaper out of his pocket.</i>
Here we are.... I’ve learnt from the papers that there used to be one,
Dobrolubov <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Note: Dobroluboy (1836-81), in spite of the shortness of his
career, established himself as one of the classic literary critics of
Russia.</i>, for instance, but what he wrote—I don’t know... God only
knows.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Somebody is heard tapping on the floor from below.</i> There....
They’re calling me downstairs, somebody’s come to see me. I’ll be back
in a minute... won’t be long.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit hurriedly, scratching his beard.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>He’s up to something.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>Yes, he looked so pleased as he went out that I’m pretty
certain he’ll bring you a present in a moment.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>How unpleasant!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Yes, it’s awful. He’s always doing silly things.
</p>
<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b>.
<pre xml:space="preserve">
“There stands a green oak by the sea.
And a chain of bright gold is around it...
And a chain of bright gold is around it....”
</pre>
<p>
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gets up and sings softly.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>You’re not very bright to-day, Masha. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b> sings, putting on her
hat.</i> Where are you off to?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>Home.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>That’s odd....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>On a name-day, too!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>It doesn’t matter. I’ll come in the evening. Good-bye, dear.
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b>.</i> Many happy returns, though I’ve said it before. In the
old days when father was alive, every time we had a name-day, thirty or
forty officers used to come, and there was lots of noise and fun, and
to-day there’s only a man and a half, and it’s as quiet as a desert...
I’m off... I’ve got the hump to-day, and am not at all cheerful, so
don’t you mind me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs through her tears.</i> We’ll have a talk later
on, but good-bye for the present, my dear; I’ll go somewhere.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Displeased.</i> You are queer....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Crying.</i> I understand you, Masha.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</td>
<td>When a man talks philosophy, well, it is philosophy or at any
rate sophistry; but when a woman, or two women, talk philosophy—it’s
all my eye.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>What do you mean by that, you very awful man?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</td>
<td>Oh, nothing. You came down on me before I could say... help!
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pause.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Angrily, to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</b>.</i> Don’t cry!
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Anfisa</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferapont</b> with a cake.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anfisa</td>
<td>This way, my dear. Come in, your feet are clean. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</b>.</i> From
the District Council, from Mihail Ivanitch Protopopov... a cake.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Thank you. Please thank him. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes the cake.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferapont</td>
<td>What?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Louder.</i> Please thank him.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Give him a pie, nurse. Ferapont, go, she’ll give you a pie.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferapont</td>
<td>What?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anfisa</td>
<td>Come on, gran’fer, Ferapont Spiridonitch. Come on. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>I don’t like this Mihail Potapitch or Ivanitch, Protopopov. We
oughtn’t to invite him here.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>I never asked him.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>That’s all right.
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</b> followed by a soldier with a silver samovar; there is
a rumble of dissatisfied surprise.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Covers her face with her hands.</i> A samovar! That’s awful! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit
into the dining-room, to the table.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>My dear Ivan Romanovitch, what are you doing!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i> I told you so!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>Ivan Romanovitch, you are simply shameless!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td>My dear good girl, you are the only thing, and the dearest
thing I have in the world. I’ll soon be sixty. I’m an old man, a lonely
worthless old man. The only good thing in me is my love for you, and if
it hadn’t been for that, I would have been dead long ago.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</b>.</i>
My dear little girl, I’ve known you since the day of your birth, I’ve
carried you in my arms... I loved your dead mother....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>But your presents are so expensive!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Angrily, through his tears.</i> Expensive presents.... You
really, are!... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To the orderly.</i> Take the samovar in there.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Teasing.</i>
Expensive presents!
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The orderly goes into the dining-room with the samovar.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anfisa</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enters and crosses stage.</i> My dear, there’s a strange Colonel
come! He’s taken off his coat already. Children, he’s coming here. Irina
darling, you’ll be a nice and polite little girl, won’t you.... Should
have lunched a long time ago.... Oh, Lord.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>It must be Vershinin. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</b>.</i> Lieutenant-Colonel
Vershinin!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</b>.</i> I have the honour to introduce myself,
my name is Vershinin. I am very glad indeed to be able to come at last.
How you’ve grown! Oh! oh!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Please sit down. We’re very glad you’ve come.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gaily.</i> I am glad, very glad! But there are three sisters,
surely. I remember—three little girls. I forget your faces, but
your father, Colonel Prosorov, used to have three little girls, I
remember that perfectly, I saw them with my own eyes. How time does fly!
Oh, dear, how it flies!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>Alexander Ignateyevitch comes from Moscow.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>From Moscow? Are you from Moscow?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>Yes, that’s so. Your father used to be in charge of a battery
there, and I was an officer in the same brigade. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b>.</i> I seem to
remember your face a little.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>I don’t remember you.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Olga! Olga! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shouts into the dining-room.</i> Olga! Come along! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</b>
enters from the dining-room.</i> Lieutenant Colonel Vershinin comes from
Moscow, as it happens.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>I take it that you are Olga Sergeyevna, the eldest, and that
you are Maria... and you are Irina, the youngest....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>So you come from Moscow?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>Yes. I went to school in Moscow and began my service there; I
was there for a long time until at last I got my battery and moved over
here, as you see. I don’t really remember you, I only remember that
there used to be three sisters. I remember your father well; I have only
to shut my eyes to see him as he was. I used to come to your house in
Moscow....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>I used to think I remembered everybody, but...
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>My name is Alexander Ignateyevitch.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Alexander Ignateyevitch, you’ve come from Moscow. That is really
quite a surprise!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>We are going to live there, you see.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>We think we may be there this autumn. It’s our native town, we
were born there. In Old Basmanni Road.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They both laugh for joy.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>We’ve unexpectedly met a fellow countryman. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Briskly.</i> I remember:
Do you remember, Olga, they used to speak at home of a “lovelorn Major.”
You were only a Lieutenant then, and in love with somebody, but for some
reason they always called you a Major for fun.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i> That’s it... the lovelorn Major, that’s got it!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>You only wore moustaches then. You have grown older! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Through her
tears.</i> You have grown older!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>Yes, when they used to call me the lovelorn Major, I was
young and in love. I’ve grown out of both now.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>But you haven’t a single white hair yet. You’re older, but you’re
not yet old.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>I’m forty-two, anyway. Have you been away from Moscow long?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Eleven years. What are you crying for, Masha, you little fool....
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Crying.</i> And I’m crying too.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>It’s all right. And where did you live?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>Old Basmanni Road.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Same as we.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>Once I used to live in German Street. That was when the Red
Barracks were my headquarters. There’s an ugly bridge in between, where
the water rushes underneath. One gets melancholy when one is alone
there. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pause.</i> Here the river is so wide and fine! It’s a splendid
river!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Yes, but it’s so cold. It’s very cold here, and the midges....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>What are you saying! Here you’ve got such a fine healthy
Russian climate. You’ve a forest, a river... and birches. Dear, modest
birches, I like them more than any other tree. It’s good to live here.
Only it’s odd that the railway station should be thirteen miles away....
Nobody knows why.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</td>
<td>I know why. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">All look at him.</i> Because if it was near it wouldn’t
be far off, and if it’s far off, it can’t be near. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">An awkward pause.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>Funny man.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Now I know who you are. I remember.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>I used to know your mother.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td>She was a good woman, rest her soul.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Mother is buried in Moscow.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>At the Novo-Devichi Cemetery.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>Do you know, I’m beginning to forget her face. We’ll be forgotten
in just the same way.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>Yes, they’ll forget us. It’s our fate, it can’t be helped. A
time will come when everything that seems serious, significant, or very
important to us will be forgotten, or considered trivial. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pause.</i> And
the curious thing is that we can’t possibly find out what will come to
be regarded as great and important, and what will be feeble, or silly.
Didn’t the discoveries of Copernicus, or Columbus, say, seem unnecessary
and ludicrous at first, while wasn’t it thought that some rubbish
written by a fool, held all the truth? And it may so happen that our
present existence, with which we are so satisfied, will in time appear
strange, inconvenient, stupid, unclean, perhaps even sinful....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>Who knows? But on the other hand, they may call our life
noble and honour its memory. We’ve abolished torture and capital
punishment, we live in security, but how much suffering there is still!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">In a feeble voice.</i> There, there.... The Baron will go without
his dinner if you only let him talk philosophy.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>Vassili Vassilevitch, kindly leave me alone. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Changes his
chair.</i> You’re very dull, you know.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Feebly.</i> There, there, there.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</b>.</i> The sufferings we see to-day—there are
so many of them!—still indicate a certain moral improvement in
society.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>Yes, yes, of course.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td>You said just now, Baron, that they may call our life noble;
but we are very petty.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Stands up.</i> See how little I am. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Violin
played behind.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>That’s Andrey playing—our brother.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>He’s the learned member of the family. I expect he will be a
professor some day. Father was a soldier, but his son chose an academic
career for himself.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>That was father’s wish.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>We ragged him to-day. We think he’s a little in love.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>To a local lady. She will probably come here to-day.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>You should see the way she dresses! Quite prettily, quite
fashionably too, but so badly! Some queer bright yellow skirt with a
wretched little fringe and a red bodice. And such a complexion! Andrey
isn’t in love. After all he has taste, he’s simply making fun of us. I
heard yesterday that she was going to marry Protopopov, the chairman of
the Local Council. That would do her nicely.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">At the side door.</i>
Andrey, come here! Just for a minute, dear! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</b>.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>My brother, Andrey Sergeyevitch.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>My name is Vershinin.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</td>
<td>Mine is Prosorov. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Wipes his perspiring hands.</i> You’ve come to
take charge of the battery?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Just think, Alexander Ignateyevitch comes from Moscow.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</td>
<td>That’s all right. Now my little sisters won’t give you any rest.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>I’ve already managed to bore your sisters.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Just look what a nice little photograph frame Andrey gave me
to-day. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shows it.</i> He made it himself.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looks at the frame and does not know what to say.</i> Yes....
It’s a thing that...
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>And he made that frame there, on the piano as well. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Andrey waves
his hand and walks away.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>He’s got a degree, and plays the violin, and cuts all sorts of
things out of wood, and is really a domestic Admirable Crichton. Don’t
go away, Andrey! He’s got into a habit of always going away. Come here!
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</b> take his arms and laughingly lead him back.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>Come on, come on!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</td>
<td>Please leave me alone.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>You are funny. Alexander Ignateyevitch used to be called the
lovelorn Major, but he never minded.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>Not the least.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>I’d like to call you the lovelorn fiddler!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Or the lovelorn professor!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>He’s in love! little Andrey is in love!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Applauds.</i> Bravo, Bravo! Encore! Little Andrey is in love.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes up behind <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</b> and takes him round the waist with
both arms.</i> Nature only brought us into the world that we should love!
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Roars with laughter, then sits down and reads a newspaper which he
takes out of his pocket.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</td>
<td>That’s enough, quite enough.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Wipes his face.</i> I couldn’t
sleep all night and now I can’t quite find my feet, so to speak. I read
until four o’clock, then tried to sleep, but nothing happened. I thought
about one thing and another, and then it dawned and the sun crawled into
my bedroom. This summer, while I’m here, I want to translate a book from
the English....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>Do you read English?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</td>
<td>Yes father, rest his soul, educated us almost violently. It may
seem funny and silly, but it’s nevertheless true, that after his death I
began to fill out and get rounder, as if my body had had some great
pressure taken off it. Thanks to father, my sisters and I know French,
German, and English, and Irina knows Italian as well. But we paid dearly
for it all!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>A knowledge of three languages is an unnecessary luxury in this
town. It isn’t even a luxury but a sort of useless extra, like a sixth
finger. We know a lot too much.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>Well, I say! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i> You know a lot too much! I don’t think
there can really be a town so dull and stupid as to have no place for a
clever, cultured person. Let us suppose even that among the hundred
thousand inhabitants of this backward and uneducated town, there are
only three persons like yourself. It stands to reason that you won’t be
able to conquer that dark mob around you; little by little as you grow
older you will be bound to give way and lose yourselves in this crowd of
a hundred thousand human beings; their life will suck you up in itself,
but still, you won’t disappear having influenced nobody; later on,
others like you will come, perhaps six of them, then twelve, and so on,
until at last your sort will be in the majority. In two or three hundred
years’ time life on this earth will be unimaginably beautiful and
wonderful. Mankind needs such a life, and if it is not ours to-day then
we must look ahead for it, wait, think, prepare for it. We must see and
know more than our fathers and grandfathers saw and knew. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i> And
you complain that you know too much.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes off her hat.</i> I’ll stay to lunch.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sighs.</i> Yes, all that ought to be written down.
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</b> has gone out quietly.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>You say that many years later on, life on this earth will be
beautiful and wonderful. That’s true. But to share in it now, even
though at a distance, we must prepare by work....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gets up.</i> Yes. What a lot of flowers you have. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looks round.</i>
It’s a beautiful flat. I envy you! I’ve spent my whole life in rooms
with two chairs, one sofa, and fires which always smoke. I’ve never had
flowers like these in my life.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rubs his hands.</i> Well, well!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>Yes, we must work. You are probably thinking to yourself: the
German lets himself go. But I assure you I’m a Russian, I can’t even
speak German. My father belonged to the Orthodox Church.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pause.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Walks about the stage.</i> I often wonder: suppose we could
begin life over again, knowing what we were doing? Suppose we could use
one life, already ended, as a sort of rough draft for another? I think
that every one of us would try, more than anything else, not to repeat
himself, at the very least he would rearrange his manner of life, he
would make sure of rooms like these, with flowers and light... I have a
wife and two daughters, my wife’s health is delicate and so on and so
on, and if I had to begin life all over again I would not marry.... No,
no!
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</b> in a regulation jacket.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Going up to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</b>.</i> Dear sister, allow me to congratulate you
on the day sacred to your good angel and to wish you, sincerely and from
the bottom of my heart, good health and all that one can wish for a girl
of your years. And then let me offer you this book as a present. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives
it to her.</i> It is the history of our High School during the last fifty
years, written by myself. The book is worthless, and written because I
had nothing to do, but read it all the same. Good day, gentlemen! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To
<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</b>.</i> My name is Kuligin, I am a master of the local High School.
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Note: He adds that he is a <i>Nadvorny Sovetnik</i> (almost the same as
a German <i>Hofrat</i>), an undistinguished civilian title with no
English equivalent.</i> <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</b>.</i> In this book you will find a list of all
those who have taken the full course at our High School during these
fifty years. <i>Feci quod potui, faciant meliora potentes</i>. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses
<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b>.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>But you gave me one of these at Easter.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i> I couldn’t have, surely! You’d better give it back to
me in that case, or else give it to the Colonel. Take it, Colonel.
You’ll read it some day when you’re bored.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>Thank you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Prepares to go.</i> I am extremely happy to have made
the acquaintance of...
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Must you go? No, not yet?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>You’ll stop and have lunch with us. Please do.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Yes, please!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Bows.</i> I seem to have dropped in on your name-day. Forgive
me, I didn’t know, and I didn’t offer you my congratulations. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes with
<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</b> into the dining-room.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td>To-day is Sunday, the day of rest, so let us rest and rejoice,
each in a manner compatible with his age and disposition. The carpets
will have to be taken up for the summer and put away till the winter...
Persian powder or naphthaline.... The Romans were healthy because they
knew both how to work and how to rest, they had <i>mens sana in corpore
sano</i>. Their life ran along certain recognized patterns. Our director
says: “The chief thing about each life is its pattern. Whoever loses his
pattern is lost himself”—and it’s just the same in our daily life.
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b> by the waist, laughing.</i> Masha loves me. My wife loves me.
And you ought to put the window curtains away with the carpets.... I’m
feeling awfully pleased with life to-day. Masha, we’ve got to be at the
director’s at four. They’re getting up a walk for the pedagogues and
their families.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>I shan’t go.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Hurt.</i> My dear Masha, why not?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>I’ll tell you later.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Angrily.</i> All right, I’ll go, only please
stand back.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Steps away.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td>And then we’re to spend the evening at the director’s. In spite
of his ill-health that man tries, above everything else, to be sociable.
A splendid, illuminating personality. A wonderful man. After yesterday’s
committee he said to me: “I’m tired, Feodor Ilitch, I’m tired!” <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looks
at the clock, then at his watch.</i> Your clock is seven minutes fast.
“Yes,” he said, “I’m tired.” <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Violin played off.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>Let’s go and have lunch! There’s to be a masterpiece of baking!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td>Oh my dear Olga, my dear. Yesterday I was working till eleven
o’clock at night, and got awfully tired. To-day I’m quite happy. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes
into dining-room.</i> My dear...
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Puts his paper into his pocket, and combs his beard.</i> A pie?
Splendid!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Severely to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</b>.</i> Only mind; you’re not to drink anything
to-day. Do you hear? It’s bad for you.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td>Oh, that’s all right. I haven’t been drunk for two years.
And it’s all the same, anyway!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>You’re not to dare to drink, all the same. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Angrily, but so that
her husband should not hear.</i> Another dull evening at the Director’s,
confound it!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>I shouldn’t go if I were you.... It’s quite simple.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td>Don’t go.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td>Yes, “don’t go....” It’s a cursed, unbearable life.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes into
dining-room.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Follows her.</i> It’s not so bad.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Going into the dining-room.</i> There, there, there....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>Vassili Vassilevitch, that’s enough. Be quiet!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</td>
<td>There, there, there....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gaily.</i> Your health, Colonel! I’m a pedagogue and not quite at
home here. I’m Masha’s husband.... She’s a good sort, a very good sort.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>I’ll have some of this black vodka.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drinks.</i> Your health!
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</b>.</i> I’m very comfortable here!
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Only <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</b> are now left in the sitting-room.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Masha’s out of sorts to-day. She married when she was eighteen,
when he seemed to her the wisest of men. And now it’s different. He’s
the kindest man, but not the wisest.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Impatiently.</i> Andrey, when are you coming?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Off.</i> One minute. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enters and goes to the table.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>What are you thinking about?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>I don’t like this Soleni of yours and I’m afraid of him. He only
says silly things.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td>He’s a queer man. I’m sorry for him, though he vexes me. I
think he’s shy. When there are just the two of us he’s quite all right
and very good company; when other people are about he’s rough and
hectoring. Don’t let’s go in, let them have their meal without us. Let
me stay with you. What are you thinking of? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pause.</i> You’re twenty. I’m
not yet thirty. How many years are there left to us, with their long,
long lines of days, filled with my love for you....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Nicolai Lvovitch, don’t speak to me of love.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tuzenbach</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Does not hear.</i> I’ve a great thirst for life, struggle, and
work, and this thirst has united with my love for you, Irina, and you’re
so beautiful, and life seems so beautiful to me! What are you thinking
about?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>You say that life is beautiful. Yes, if only it seems so! The
life of us three hasn’t been beautiful yet; it has been stifling us as
if it was weeds... I’m crying. I oughtn’t.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Dries her tears, smiles.</i>
We must work, work. That is why we are unhappy and look at the world so
sadly; we don’t know what work is. Our parents despised work....
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter NATALIA IVANOVA; she wears a pink dress and a green sash.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Natasha</td>
<td>They’re already at lunch... I’m late... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Carefully examines
herself in a mirror, and puts herself straight.</i> I think my hair’s done
all right.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sees <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</b>.</i> Dear Irina Sergeyevna, I congratulate you!
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses her firmly and at length.</i> You’ve so many visitors, I’m really
ashamed.... How do you do, Baron!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enters from dining-room.</i> Here’s Natalia Ivanovna. How are you,
dear! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They kiss.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Natasha</td>
<td>Happy returns. I’m awfully shy, you’ve so many people here.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>All our friends. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Frightened, in an undertone.</i> You’re wearing a
green sash! My dear, you shouldn’t!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Natasha</td>
<td>Is it a sign of anything?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>No, it simply doesn’t go well... and it looks so queer.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Natasha</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">In a tearful voice.</i> Yes? But it isn’t really green, it’s too
dull for that. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes into dining-room with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</b>.</i>
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They have all sat down to lunch in the dining-room, the sitting-room is
empty.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td>I wish you a nice fiancée, Irina. It’s quite time you married.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td>Natalia Ivanovna, I wish you the same.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td>Natalia Ivanovna has a fiancé already.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Raps with her fork on a plate.</i> Let’s all get drunk and make life
purple for once!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td>You’ve lost three good conduct marks.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>This is a nice drink. What’s it made of?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Soleni</td>
<td>Blackbeetles.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Tearfully.</i> Phoo! How disgusting!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Olga</td>
<td>There is to be a roast turkey and a sweet apple pie for dinner.
Thank goodness I can spend all day and the evening at home. You’ll come
in the evening, ladies and gentlemen....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vershinin</td>
<td>And please may I come in the evening!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>Please do.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Natasha</td>
<td>They don’t stand on ceremony here.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td>Nature only brought us into the world that we should love!
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Angrily.</i> Please don’t! Aren’t you tired of it?
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fedotik</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rode</b> with a large basket of flowers.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fedotik</td>
<td>They’re lunching already.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rode</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Loudly and thickly.</i> Lunching? Yes, so they are....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fedotik</td>
<td>Wait a minute! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes a photograph.</i> That’s one. No, just a
moment.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes another.</i> That’s two. Now we’re ready!
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They take the basket and go into the dining-room, where they have a
noisy reception.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rode</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Loudly.</i> Congratulations and best wishes! Lovely weather to-day,
simply perfect. Was out walking with the High School students all the
morning. I take their drills.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fedotik</td>
<td>You may move, Irina Sergeyevna! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes a photograph.</i> You look
well to-day. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes a humming-top out of his pocket.</i> Here’s a
humming-top, by the way. It’s got a lovely note!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Irina</td>
<td>How awfully nice!
</p>
<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Masha</b>.
<pre xml:space="preserve">
“There stands a green oak by the sea,
And a chain of bright gold is around it...
And a chain of bright gold is around it...”
</pre>
<p>
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Tearfully.</i> What am I saying that for? I’ve had those words running in
my head all day....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td>There are thirteen at table!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rode</td>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> Surely you don’t believe in that superstition? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughter.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kuligin</td>
<td>If there are thirteen at table then it means there are lovers
present. It isn’t you, Ivan Romanovitch, hang it all.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughter.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chebutikin</td>
<td>I’m a hardened sinner, but I really don’t see why Natalia
Ivanovna should blush....
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Loud laughter; NATASHA runs out into the sitting-room, followed by
<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</b>.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</td>
<td>Don’t pay any attention to them! Wait... do stop, please....
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Natasha</td>
<td>I’m shy... I don’t know what’s the matter with me and they’re
all laughing at me. It wasn’t nice of me to leave the table like that,
but I can’t... I can’t. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Covers her face with her hands.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</td>
<td>My dear, I beg you. I implore you not to excite yourself. I
assure you they’re only joking, they’re kind people. My dear, good girl,
they’re all kind and sincere people, and they like both you and me. Come
here to the window, they can’t see us here.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looks round.</i>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Natasha</td>
<td>I’m so unaccustomed to meeting people!
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Andrey</td>
<td>Oh your youth, your splendid, beautiful youth! My darling, don’t
be so excited! Believe me, believe me... I’m so happy, my soul is full
of love, of ecstasy.... They don’t see us! They can’t! Why, why or when
did I fall in love with you—Oh, I can’t understand anything. My
dear, my pure darling, be my wife! I love you, love you... as never
before.... <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They kiss.</i>
<tr>
<td/>
<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Two officers come in and, seeing the lovers kiss, stop in
astonishment.</i>
</p>
<p>
Curtain.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
